Update Readme with PTQ section (#1505)
openvinotoolkit/nncf: docs/compression_algorithms/post_training/Quantization.md

## Post-Training Quantization

Post-Training Quantization is the quantization algorithm which doesn't demand training of a model. 
It utilizes a small subset of the initial dataset to calibrate quantization constants.

NNCF provides an advanced Post-Training Quantization algorithm, which consists of following techniques:

1) MinMaxQuantization - Analyzes model and insert extra quantization layers
with parameters are calibrated using the small subset. 
2) FastBiasCorrection or BiasCorrection - Reduces the bias errors of the quantized layers and original layers.

### Usage

To start the algorithm the user should provide:
1) Original model.

> 2) Validation part of the dataset.

Reviewer: Validation part or the representative part?

## Post-Training Quantization

Post-Training Quantization is the quantization algorithm which doesn't demand retraining of a quantized model. 
It utilizes a small subset of the initial dataset to calibrate quantization constants.

NNCF provides an advanced Post-Training Quantization algorithm, which consists of following techniques:

1) MinMaxQuantization - Analyzes model and inserts extra quantization layers
are calibrated using the small subset. 
2) FastBiasCorrection or BiasCorrection - Reduces the bias errors between the quantized layers and the corresponding original layers.

### Usage

To start the algorithm the user should provide:
* Original model.
* Validation part of the dataset.
* [Data transformation function](#data-transfomation-function) from original dataset format to the NNCF format.

The basic workflow steps:

> 1) Create the [data transformation function](#data-transfomation-function).

Reviewer 2: Can you add the small code snippets for each step. Something like that should be ok:
```
# Step 1: Initialize transformation function
def transform_fn(data_item):
    images, _ = data_item
    return images
# Step 2: Initialize NNCF Dataset
calibration_dataset = nncf.Dataset(val_dataset, transform_fn)
# Step 3: Run the quantization pipeline
quantized_model = nncf.quantize(model, calibration_dataset)
```

Author: Updated

## Post-Training Quantization

Post-Training Quantization is a quantization algorithm that doesn't demand retraining of a quantized model.
It utilizes a small subset of the initial dataset to calibrate quantization constants.

NNCF provides an advanced Post-Training Quantization algorithm, which consists of the following techniques:

1) MinMaxQuantization - Analyzes the model and inserts extra quantization layers calibrated on a small subset.
2) FastBiasCorrection or BiasCorrection - Reduces the bias errors between quantized layers and the corresponding
   original layers.

### Usage

To start the algorithm, provide the following entities:

* Original model.
* Validation part of the dataset.

> * [Data transformation function](#data-transformation-function) from the original dataset format to the NNCF format.

Author: But your statement also is not true. ONNX demands the data format aligned with inference engine. And what do you mean by model's input data - it is not clear at all

> * [Data transformation function](#data-transformation-function) from the original dataset format to the NNCF format.

Reviewer 3: Look at this
https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/nncf/blob/f52f94cfbdc987174dc3dda17b35f2bc03df9ca4/examples/post_training_quantization/onnx/mobilenet_v2/main.py#L103-L113

> * [Data transformation function](#data-transformation-function) from the original dataset format to the NNCF format.

Author: Ok, I will update it

> * [Data transformation function](#data-transformation-function) from the original dataset format to the NNCF format.

Reviewer 3: For ONNX we should provide the `input_feed` dictionary `{ input_name: input_value }`. For me, it is the same as the model's input data. Am I wrong?

> * [Data transformation function](#data-transformation-function) from the original dataset format to the NNCF format.

Author: In my view `input_data` is directly the input tensors, but this is the question of terminology

> * [Data transformation function](#data-transformation-function) from the original dataset format to the NNCF format.

Author: Done

The basic workflow steps:

1) Create the [data transformation function](#data-transformation-function).

```python
def transform_fn(data_item):
    images, _ = data_item

>     return images

Reviewer 3: It is confusing. When you see it for the first time probably you just copy-paste this code to your example. It may not be suitable for your case.

I think it is better to write here something like this:

```
# Transform `data_item` to the model's input data.
```

Author: This suggestion was from @AlexKoff88 to have an initial understanding what it is behind these steps. I think that this is a good suggestion.

Author: I think we should align here with other steps. So, they either should provide code snippets or not.

```

> 2) Initialize NNCF Dataset with a validation dataset and a transformation function.

Author: Make sense

> 2) Initialize NNCF Dataset with a validation dataset and a transformation function.

Author: Done

```python
calibration_dataset = nncf.Dataset(val_dataset, transform_fn)
```

3) Run the quantization pipeline.

```python
quantized_model = nncf.quantize(model, calibration_dataset)
```

> ### Data Transformation Function

Reviewer 3: I find this section not very clear.

Author: This section aims to describe the goal of having transformation_fn and the guidelines how to write it for each backend.

## Post-Training Quantization

Post-Training Quantization is the quantization algorithm which doesn't demand retraining of a quantized model.
It utilizes a small subset of the initial dataset to calibrate quantization constants.

> NNCF provides an advanced Post-Training Quantization algorithm, which consists of following techniques:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
NNCF provides an advanced Post-Training Quantization algorithm, which consists of the following techniques:
```

> 1) MinMaxQuantization - Analyzes model and inserts extra quantization layers calibrated on a small subset.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1) MinMaxQuantization - Analyzes the model and inserts extra quantization layers calibrated on a small subset.
```

2) FastBiasCorrection or BiasCorrection - Reduces the bias errors between quantized layers and the corresponding
   original layers.

### Usage

To start the algorithm following entities should be provided:

* Original model.
* Validation part of the dataset.

> * [Data transformation function](#data-transfomation-function) from original dataset format to the NNCF format.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* [Data transformation function](#data-transfomation-function) from the original dataset format to the NNCF format.
```

The basic workflow steps:

> 1) Create the [data transformation function](#data-transfomation-function).

Reviewer 4: the links seems broken

Author: Fixed

```python
def transform_fn(data_item):
    images, _ = data_item
    return images
```

2) Initialize NNCF Dataset with a validation dataset and a transformation function.

```python
calibration_dataset = nncf.Dataset(val_dataset, transform_fn)
```

3) Run the quantization pipeline.

```python
quantized_model = nncf.quantize(model, calibration_dataset)
```

### Data Transformation Function

> Model input structure differs from one pipeline to another. Thus NNCF introduces the interface to adapt the user dataset format to the NNCF format. This interface is called data transformation function.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Model input structure differs from one pipeline to another. Thus NNCF introduces the interface to adapt the user dataset format to the NNCF format. This interface is called the data transformation function.
```

> Every backend has own return value format for transformation function. It is based on the input structure of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Every backend has its own return value format for the transformation function. It is based on the input structure of the
```

Author: Added

backend inference framework.

> There are formats of data transformation function for each supported backend below.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Below are the formats of data transformation function for each supported backend.
```

<details><summary><b>PyTorch, TensorFlow, OpenVINO</b></summary>

The return format of data transformation function is directly the input tensors, consumed by the model.

> If you are not sure that your implementation of data transformation function is correct you can validate it by using the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The return format of the data transformation function is directly the input tensors consumed by the model.
If you are not sure that your implementation of data transformation function is correct, you can validate it by using the
```

Author: Added

following code:

```python
model = ...  # Model
val_loader = ...  # Original Dataset
transform_fn = ...  # Data transformation function
for data_item in val_loader:
    model(transform_fn(data_item))
```

</details>
<details><summary><b>ONNX</b></summary>

[ONNXRuntime](https://onnxruntime.ai/) is used as the inference engine for ONNX backend. \

> Input format of the data is following - ```Dict[str, np.ndarray]```, where keys of the dictionary are the model input names and values are numpy tensors passed to these inputs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[ONNX Runtime](https://onnxruntime.ai/) is used as the inference engine for the ONNX backend. \
The input format of the data is the following: ```Dict[str, np.ndarray]```, where keys of the dictionary are the model input names and values are numpy tensors passed to these inputs.
```

Author: Added

> If you are not sure that your implementation of data transformation function is correct you can validate it by using the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you are not sure that your implementation of data transformation function is correct, you can validate it by using the
```

following code:

```python
import onnxruntime

model_path = ...  # Path to Model
val_loader = ...  # Original Dataset
transform_fn = ...  # Data transformation function
sess = onnxruntime.InferenceSession(model_path)
output_names = [output.name for output in sess.get_outputs()]
for data_item in val_loader:
    sess.run(output_names, input_feed=transform_fn(data_item))
```

</details>

> NNCF provides the examples of Post-Training Quantization where you can find the implementation of data transformation
> function: [PyTorch](../../../examples/post_training_quantization/torch/mobilenet_v2/README.md)
> , [TensorFlow](../../../examples/post_training_quantization/tensorflow/mobilenet_v2/README.md)
> , [ONNX](../../../examples/post_training_quantization/onnx/mobilenet_v2/README.md)
> , [OpenVINO](../../../examples/post_training_quantization/openvino/mobilenet_v2/README.md)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
NNCF provides the examples of Post-Training Quantization where you can find the implementation of data transformation
function: [PyTorch](../../../examples/post_training_quantization/torch/mobilenet_v2/README.md), [TensorFlow](../../../examples/post_training_quantization/tensorflow/mobilenet_v2/README.md), [ONNX](../../../examples/post_training_quantization/onnx/mobilenet_v2/README.md), and [OpenVINO](../../../examples/post_training_quantization/openvino/mobilenet_v2/README.md)
```

2) FastBiasCorrection or BiasCorrection - Reduces the bias errors between quantized layers and the corresponding
   original layers.

### Usage

To start the algorithm following entities should be provided:

* Original model.
* Validation part of the dataset.
* [Data transformation function](#data-transfomation-function) from original dataset format to the NNCF format.

The basic workflow steps:

1) Create the [data transformation function](#data-transfomation-function).

```python
def transform_fn(data_item):
    images, _ = data_item
    return images
```

2) Initialize NNCF Dataset with a validation dataset and a transformation function.

```python
calibration_dataset = nncf.Dataset(val_dataset, transform_fn)
```

3) Run the quantization pipeline.

```python
quantized_model = nncf.quantize(model, calibration_dataset)
```

### Data Transformation function

Every training pipeline consumes data structure to feed the model, which is different from pipeline to pipeline. Thus
NNCF introduces the data transformation function, providing the interface to adapt the user dataset format to the NNCF
format.

> Every backend has own return value format for transformation function. It is based on the input structure of

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Every backend has its own return value format for transformation function. It is based on the input structure of
```

backend inference framework.
There are formats of data transformation function for each supported backend below.

<details><summary><b>PyTorch, TensorFlow, OpenVINO</b></summary>

The return format of data transformation function is directly the input tensors, consumed by the model.
If you are not sure that your implementation of data transformation function is correct you can validate it by using the
following code:

```python
model = ...  # Model
val_loader = ...  # Original Dataset
transform_fn = ...  # Data transformation function
for data_item in val_loader:
    model(transform_fn(data_item))
```

</details>
<details><summary><b>ONNX</b></summary>

[ONNXRuntime](https://onnxruntime.ai/) is used as the inference engine for ONNX backend. \

> Input format of the data is following - ```Dict[str, np.ndarray]```, where keys of the dictionary are the model input names and values are numpy tensors passed to these inputs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Input format of the data is the following - ```Dict[str, np.ndarray]```, where keys of the dictionary are the model input names and values are numpy tensors passed to these inputs.
```

## Post-Training Quantization

> Post-Training Quantization is the quantization algorithm which doesn't demand retraining of a quantized model.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Post-Training Quantization is the quantization algorithm that doesn't demand retraining of a quantized model.
```

Author: a quantization algorithm or an quantization algorithm?

Reviewer 5: a quantization algorithm

Reviewer 5: a quantization algorithm

Reviewer 4: I'd also spell doesn't with two words

It utilizes a small subset of the initial dataset to calibrate quantization constants.

> NNCF provides an advanced Post-Training Quantization algorithm, which consists of following techniques:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
NNCF provides an advanced Post-Training Quantization algorithm, that consists of following techniques:
```

Author: I prefer to say that it is `consists of`, Because PTQ is just a container for the algorithms.

Reviewer 5: In this case, I think "which" is correct as its an additional information: https://www.dictionary.com/e/that-vs-which/

> 1) MinMaxQuantization - Analyzes model and inserts extra quantization layers
>    are calibrated using the small subset.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1) MinMaxQuantization - Analyzes model and inserts extra quantization layers calibrated on a small subset.
```

> 2) FastBiasCorrection or BiasCorrection - Reduces the bias errors between the quantized layers and the corresponding
>    original layers.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
2) FastBiasCorrection or BiasCorrection - Reduces the bias errors between quantized layers and corresponding
   original layers.
```

Author: Done

### Usage

> To start the algorithm the user should provide:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
To start the algorithm following entities should be provided:
```

* Original model.
* Validation part of the dataset.
* [Data transformation function](#data-transfomation-function) from original dataset format to the NNCF format.

The basic workflow steps:

1) Create the [data transformation function](#data-transfomation-function).

```python
def transform_fn(data_item):
    images, _ = data_item
    return images
```

2) Initialize NNCF Dataset with the validation dataset and the transformation function.

```python
calibration_dataset = nncf.Dataset(val_dataset, transform_fn)
```

3) Run the quantization pipeline.

```python
quantized_model = nncf.quantize(model, calibration_dataset)
```

### Data Transformation function

> Every training pipeline consumes data structure to feed the model, which is different from pipeline to pipeline. Thus
> NNCF introduces the data transformation function, providing the interface to adapt the user dataset format to the NNCF
> format.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Model input structure could differ from one pipeline to another. To make it possible to feed input data to target model during calibration step NNCF introduces data transformation function that provides an interface to adapt user dataset format to the NNCF data format.
```

> Every backend has own return value format for transformation function. It is based on the input data structure of the
> backend inference framework.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Every backend has own return value format for transformation function based on backend inference framework input data structure.
```

Author: Done

Reviewer 5: has **its** own

Author: Done

> Below there are formats of transformation function for each supported backend .

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
There are formats of transformation function for each supported backend below.
```

<details><summary><b>PyTorch, TensorFlow, OpenVINO</b></summary>

> The return format of data transformation function is directly the input tensors, consumed by the model.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The data transformation function is intended to return data that is used as input tensor for the target model during model calibration step.
```

Reviewer 6: ```return format is ... the input tensors```, that's  not clear for me

If you are not sure that your implementation of data transformation function is correct you can validate it by using the
following code:

```python
model = ...  # Model
val_loader = ...  # Original Dataset
transform_fn = ...  # Data transformation function
for data_item in val_loader:
    model(transform_fn(data_item))
```

</details>
<details><summary><b>ONNX</b></summary>

[ONNXRuntime](https://onnxruntime.ai/) is used as the inference engine for ONNX backend. \

> The input format of the data is following - ```Dict[str, np.ndarray]```, where the keys of the dict are names of the
> model inputs and the values are the numpy tensors passed to these inputs.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Input format of the data is following - ```Dict[str, np.ndarray]```, where keys of the dict are the model input names and values are numpy tensors passed to these inputs.
```

Author: Done
